So, hello to everyone, to everyone here and to everyone online, and yeah, well, we are
very happy to have you here for our last session of this Semiosalon series.
And today we have two speakers and we are very, very happy to have one of them here
with us.
We have Professor Patrick Serio and Professor Angeil Tutend, who will be joining online
from Bern, Bern, from Switzerland.
And first we will have Professor Serio and just for a brief introduction, although some
of you might already have heard this introduction from yesterday, Professor Serio.
He studied Slavic and languages and general linguistics at Paris in the Sorbonne.
And his PhD thesis was an analysis of the Soviet political discourse aiming at revealing the
predicate of relations embedded in nominalized, nominal phrases.
And after that he spent some years as a researcher in the Sénérès, in the National Center of
Scientific Research in France.
And eventually he was appointed as an ordinary professor at Lausanne in 1987.
His main field of research and of teaching is the history of linguistics in Russia, the
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe from a comparative and epistemological approach.
And he has many books, he has written many books.
Perhaps the one you might know is this one, Structure and the Whole, East, West and Non-Darwinian
Biology in the origins of structural linguistics, which is really a great book not only because
of the way, not only because of the depth of the research, but also because the way it
is written.
And we had actually, he wrote some review about this book, I think.
And there is a Czech translation, so you have no excuse not to read it, it's wonderful.
And yes, and well, we are really, really very happy to have him here and today he will talk
about the reception of the Soviet Union and well, without further ado, I will give the
floor to Professor Sudev.
Thank you very much, Professor Sudev.
So, yes, now everyone online can see the screen, right?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry,
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry, I'm sorry.
and Catholicism are two different variants of the same religion.
Sosir is, of course, an all-common hero.
He's supposed to be the father of general linguistics.
But I think that the negative reception is important.
It is interesting to understand what the arguments were of this negative understanding of Sosir,
because it gives us the possibility to understand more exactly what are the original features of Sosir linguistics.
So, Sosir has been widely read in the Soviet Union.
The first time the Russians heard about the book was by Kartszewski.
In 1917, Kartszewski had been a student in Geneva, but he never listened to the course of general linguistics.
He went only one semester to Sosir's course on Sanskrit.
Nonetheless, he had heard about it by Bayi and Seche, and he did not have the book with himself in Russia,
but he gave a lecture in the Moscow Linguistics Circle.
This was the first time that in Moscow they heard about the existence of Sosir.
Then there was a first translation of the course by Rom,
but Bayi and Seche did not allow him to publish the book, unfortunately,
and the book was more or less read and understood on the manuscript of this first unpublished translation.
And in 1933 was published the first official translation of the book with a total different terminology which I will show to you.
So, I think though most of us, Sosir is the father, is the beginning of everything, but not in Russia.
Why?
First of all, there is something which is rather astonishing for us.
It is that Sosir in the 1930s in the Soviet Union was supposed to be the beginning of the sociological school of linguistics,
the beginning of the French sociological school, which is extremely different from what we know about Sosir being in fact the beginning of structuralism.
So, Soviet Sosir was a social linguist, not even a social thinker in linguistics, absolutely not about structuralism.
The third structure and structuralism was unknown in the 1930s and 40s in the Soviet Union, but Sosir, exactly like Antoine Meier, was supposed to be a social linguist.
Now, you see that if we begin to read Sosir in Russian, then we will have to wonder about the word speech and the difference between speech and language.
And here we begin to move in a very strange atmosphere where the meanings of the words are extremely unstable, especially when we translate from French to Russian and from Russian to French.
See, in the first translation of Sosir, if we have longage, long and parole, then longage was rich, long was music, and there were three different possibilities to translate parole.
Sosir with Gazevanieh is Slava. Slava is interesting. It's just like the same word in Czech, but Slava is more or less like logos in Greek, which has many, many, many meanings at the same time.
So, in the official translation of 1933, the terminology is quite different. And what is important is that rich also exists, but now it means parole, whereas longage becomes Yizhikavaya deity, that is language activity.
Unfortunately, the scientific terminology in Russian has been extremely unstable because, first of all, the tradition of Vilem von Humboldt was overwhelming.
That's quite more important than the tradition of Sosir. So you must understand that those people had two ways of understanding Sosir, away from German romanticism, I mean Humboldt, and of course, the way from Marx and Engels, especially from the German ideology and the origin of the family by Engels.
So we get a very difficult to understand reception of Sosir in those years.
Vimokur was the linguist who was the most open and positively receptive of Sosir, but he also had the so-called sociological approach to Sosorianism, and he writes that for Sosir, the phoneme is Sosir.
Socially significant sound, socially significant signifying sound, means that a society understands the sound from its social attitude.
Of course, this has absolutely nothing in common with Troubet's choism definition or the phoneme. You see, we are inside a sociological understanding of phonology.
Now, what is interesting is that in the Soviet Union, in the 1920s, 30s, and 40s, there was a general idea that science is divided into two variants, the bourgeois science and the proletarian science.
So let's say in the beginning Sosir was a social linguist, and then he became a bourgeois linguist. What is bourgeois science? I think that the idea of bourgeois science is really interesting.
Bourgeois science splits and proletarian science gathers. So we have this important overwhelming opposition between what is good, I mean gathering, and what is bad, which is splitting apart.
And here there is a huge misunderstanding about structuralism and holism.
Holism was very spread, very important in the 1930s. Holism is the idea of the body. In the body, all the organs are linked together, they work together.
The organs of the body cannot exist by themselves, but the organs of the body are not the same as the elements of a structure.
So just try to keep in mind this possibility of confusion, of misunderstanding, in the difference between holism and structuralism.
We'll speak about the problem of borders. You see, I try to get a list of all the qualificatives of Sosir in this negative reception.
So Sosir, for all those Soviet linguists, is the man who splits up, who separates. You see, in Sosir for them, we get a strict delimitation, absolute isolation and separation, delineation that limits impenetrable and mutually irreducible fields.
That is, pure splitting up, whereas what is supposed to be good linguistics, on the contrary, is interaction, interpenetration, multilateral approach of language, global and synthetic studying of language in all its complexity,
blood boundaries and zones of transition, a legacy to the real nature of language acts. This word is important. There are two key words in this Soviet negative reception is nature and essence.
It is strange that in this so-called Marxist materialist linguistics, the key words are nature and essence. Very often, you will find sentences like the real nature of the essence of the phenomena.
And the real nature of the essence of the phenomena is just precisely a platonic attitude, a platonic worldview, which means that what we see is not reality, the reality is concealed behind what we see.
So keep in mind nature and essence of the phenomena.
Now, I will show you some examples of what has been said about Saussure, just so that you can believe me.
Sherba was a Leningrad important linguist, and he, in 1929, they received the book in Leningrad, and the reaction was clear.
Sherba says, Russian linguists knew all this for a long time thanks to Baudouin de Courtenay. So the general idea that there was absolutely nothing new, we, the Russians, knew all that before. We have nothing to learn from them.
Now, Polyvanov writes in 1931, this book, received by some as a breakthrough, contains nothing strictly new compared with what was established a long time ago by the school of Baudouin de Courtenay.
Of course, we don't have time enough to explain what was peculiar for Baudouin de Courtenay. Nonetheless, please understand that what is important is nothing new.
And now, I think, a common hero, Nikolai Trugizkoi, says, I recently re-read Saussure, because all I found in it was old rubbish.
So, I do admire Trugizkoi's work, you know, it's so important. So, his consul de phonologie is so beautiful to read, but nonetheless, he did not understand Saussure. He was totally blind to what was new in Saussure.
Now, what was understood as a scandal in Saussure was the problem of antinomies. Antinomies should not exist, because if you accept antinomies, you are a bad linguist.
Voloshinov, who, please, is not Bakhtin, Voloshinov wrote in 1929 an important book on Marxism and the philosophy of language.
And in this book, he says that Saussure is totally assimilated to positivism, abstract objectivism, while Carl Fosler is credited with at least a little humanity. This is individualist subjectivism.
This is strange, you see. To think that Saussure is a positivist is a huge misunderstanding, a huge negative reception. And unfortunately, many people who read this book, thinking that Bakhtin had wrote it,
did not understand how extremely negative this reading of Saussure was in Voloshinov.
We'll have to speak about positivism. Positivism is the way the neo-Granmarians wrote about the history of languages. Positivism is the examinations of single facts.
For instance, the sounds are in Sanskrit through the Indo-European languages, which has absolutely nothing to do with the idea of a structure.
The second reproach that was done to Saussure was the oblivion of history. Of course, Saussure was interested in synchrony, not in history. But for all those Soviet linguists, this was precisely what they did not admit.
You cannot reproach a baker to not to send the fish, of course. Saussure was not interested in history. He was interested in dichrony, which is not the same.
Now, what is really interesting, and I think for all the students of first year, it should be clear that a synchrony is not a short dichrony.
You see, so, Budagov, for instance, was the main linguist in the Moscow University, was a Romanist. He thinks that at the end of the 19th century, in the Russian language, there was a 30-year synchrony.
So for him, synchrony is a sort of static dichrony, where more or less the language does not change. For him, this was a synchrony. There was a static slice of 30 years. This has nothing to do with the synchrony.
You see, this is one of the most interesting schemes in Saussure. On page 125, you will find this. This is a cross-section. And a cross-section is used to explain what are the different relationships between the parts of the text.
And a cross-section, please understand that it's not a slice. You can eat a little thin slice of carrot, but you cannot eat a cross-section of a carrot. It's impossible, because two dimensions is not the same as three dimensions.
And once you mix these two dimensions with three dimensions, then you cannot understand what synchrony is.
But if you think that a language is a thing or a living organism, then of course you will not even imagine that you can work with two dimensions.
Because you think that a language is something like a plant, like a living organism, then you will think that a synchrony is like a slice and not like a cross-section.
So it's obvious that a line has no width and a plane has no thickness. It is a difference of dimensions.
Now, all those Soviet linguists were humanists in the meaning that for them life is the explanation of everything, exactly like in romanticism.
This is the death of man.
You see, Abayev was an admirer of Vilem von Humboldt, like so many Soviet linguists were influenced by Vilem von Humboldt.
And Abayev writes from 1934 to 1965,
So Syrian structuralism is like modern art, which expels man from the field of knowledge.
So Syrian linguistics studies language in and for itself detached from the man who speaks it.
Humboldt, in a still and bryonic form, by studying the internal form of language, came close to language as ideology.
But we have many things to comment. First, you have this detached, you see, detached or splitting or separating is bad and gathering life is good.
But now you have this very important term, which is ideology.
For most of the left-wing thinkers in Western Europe, ideology means false consciousness.
This is the falsche Bebutstein from Marx in the German ideology, 1846.
But ideology here has a totally different meaning, which means precisely semantics.
Semantics is the whole amount of ideas that the speakers have in the head.
It has nothing to do with a false consciousness.
You see, if you think of, for instance, Marxist-Leonid's Gaia Ideologia, the Marxist-Leonidist ideology, of course it is not false consciousness.
It is a set of absolutely objective ideas.
So please understand that as long as we read texts from other cultures, we have to think that the meaning of the words can be totally different, although it is the same word.
So ideology is not false consciousness, but semantics, or the content of what we speak about.
So ideology in Voloshinov, in Abayev and in Marx are both social and etymological semantics.
This is not ideology in Marx, although all those people pretended to build Marxist linguistics.
Now, for one of my heroes, who is Roman Budakov, an intolerable metaphor is the chess gamer.
The chess game is a bad metaphor.
He writes, chess knows no national differences. The rules are the same for all nations.
On the contrary, every natural language is based not only on universal categories, but also on national categories.
Now, if you remember what was at stake in Germany at the very end of the 18th century, when Herder Fechter Humboldt began to refuse the philosophy of the Enlightenment,
the reproach the Germans made to French was that the Enlightenment was universal, and it did not take into account the national specificity of all the peoples.
So in the Soviet Union, which for many people was supposed to have an international ideology, in fact, the main reproach against Saussure was that he did not take into account the national specificity of each language.
So of course, in this approach, you cannot translate from one language to the other, because then you will lose this national peculiarity and specificity.
Another problem is the mere idea of value.
You see, we all know this scheme from Saussure, and this is the signifier and the signified.
Now, you remember the metaphor of the sheet of paper. If you cut a sheet of paper, then you will have one side of the paper and the other side will correspond to the third side.
That's all he says. But there is a possibility to understand this Saussureian metaphor in the Humboldtian meaning, or more exactly in the Neo-Humboldtian meaning.
You see, the Neo-Humboldtianism was very spread in Germany in the 1930s. It is the idea that the words of our language are the content of our thoughts.
So it is unfortunately possible to make a Humboldtian reading of Saussure to think that the words we use are the contents of our thoughts.
Now, it is obvious that if you accept this idea, if you think that all the speakers of one language have the same thought because they have the same language, then of course you lose the dimension of discourse
and you lose the possibility of democracy, which means that people can think differently inside the same language.
Now, we have to go now to an epistemological problem. What do we know and how do we know?
So the problem is the following. Does the object of knowledge exist before the act of knowing or not? I don't have the solution, but this is a problem which has been discussed from ages and ages.
How do we know what we know?
So once again, my Buddha, to say that the sole object of linguistic is language in and for itself is incomprehensible to a serious scientist. The purpose of language communication between people is incompatible with this definition.
It was the less sentence of the quote by Saussure. The object of linguistic is language in and for itself. And this is what was not acceptable for my Soviet linguists.
Now, what is at stake here is a confusing the properties of the model with those of the object.
But, once again, we must not forget that language is a profoundly human phenomenon. This is why it is dangerous to view it unilaterally as a system of pure values or of pure science.
It is very strange that for most of us, especially if you're interested in semiotics, it is obvious that language is a system of science, but for all of them, a language is not a system of science because it's not a system of pure values.
In 1955, the structuralist of Western Europe thought support for the idealistic construction in the logical positivism of the Vienna circle.
Once again, we come back to positivism. Positivism is the studying of separated facts, which is not at all the same as a structure for Saussure.
Oh, my God, European structuralism considers that two sided signs, consisting of content and expression, exist eminently as an ideal essence.
Given in advance in relation to this ideal or eminent sign, what exists in the real world in particular real sound speech is supposed to be no more than a shadow of this idealistically thought outside its realization or manifestation.
So we have seen that the reproach to Saussure are splitting apart, and now we come to idealism. What is idealism? It is the separation from between idealism and facts or reality or real life.
What they call real nihilists, which is a calc from the German, the Wirkliche Wirkliche.
So, for all those subjectly with language is not a system of sign. And I do advise you to read this book by Lenin, materialism and imperial criticism, where he explains that bourgeois ideology is based on science, whereas materialist way of thought,
does not accept that language is a system of sign. And if you are interested in semiotics, you must read this book, because it is extremely important. It is the demolishing of all possibility of semiotic.
So Saussure denies substance, therefore he is an idealist, and therefore is important here. You see, because for them, the language is a substance, is an essence. It has a nature, and we must figure out what this nature or essence of substance is.
And of course the structure is not a substance.
This is an idea of matching knowledge to the object to be known. The object is complex, so the description must be complex too. You know that Saussure leaves apart what is not pertinent.
He said that in English, I saw pertinence. So he's interested only in what is pertinent for his own point of view.
A point of view does not mean arbitrariness. A point of view means that you choose only you select the elements which are useful for what you are looking for.
Everything.
So I must say that perhaps you remember that Roman Jacobson, my dear Roman Jacobson said that I am a linguist and nothing which is linguistic is alien to me.
So Saussure is totally different from that. Only opposite. He leaves apart what is not pertinent for his study.
So one of the sentences of Saussure is precisely that the point of view is the object.
This is absolutely fantastically interesting.
You must have a point of view because it is impossible to know everything at the same time.
It is impossible to have an overview of the reality.
Perhaps as you are semioticians, you probably know that the Argentine writer Borges wrote a very small novel, which is called Rigor de la Ciencia, where he explained that an emperor asked his geographers to draw
a very precise map of the surroundings of the palace.
So they took a very thin pencil and they draw every stone of every path, every tree of every forest, but the emperor was not satisfied.
He wanted the totally precise map.
So what did the geographers do?
They decided to draw a map on the scale one to one, which means that one centimeter on the ground is one centimeter on the map.
So the problem is that where is this map? It is here. This is precisely the one to one map.
It does exist. So it is not useful. It is totally useless to draw a one to one map because it already exists.
So a map cannot say everything. It is impossible to reproduce reality.
A map is less like language. You have to choose what you are going to speak about.
But of course, if you imagine that the point of view is arbitrariness, then of course Tossier is an idealist.
So an enemy. So a bourgeois.
This sentence only makes sense if it deals with the object of knowledge and not the real object.
This is the main core of epistemology.
The real object exists without us. The sounds in phonetics do not need the phoneticians to exist, but the phonemes in phonomics in phonology cannot exist without the phonologists.
For instance, for one and the same language, you can have different phonemic systems.
There was a phonemic school in Leningrad and another one in Moscow.
There are totally different ways of explaining the same Russian language.
So you see this is important. A phoneme is not a thing. A phoneme does not exist.
The sounds are like mushrooms in the forest. The mushrooms exist even if you don't pick them up.
But phonemes exist only in our head. And this is what was not understandable if you think that science, the goal of science is to describe reality.
So we have this failure of knowledge, the overlap of the object of knowledge by the empirical object.
This means that there are people who do not understand the huge difference between a sound and a phoneme between phonetics and phonology.
So to conclude, I will say that you are in front of the opposition between epistemology and ontology.
Ontology is the science of being, of the real being.
Ontology is the core of metaphysics and theology.
Epistemology is the science of knowledge.
The science of knowledge is not just opening your eyes and see or opening your ears and listen to sounds.
Epistemology is the way of building a knowledge of reality.
We can speak of immanuel Kant, but we don't have time to do that.
So I think I'll begin here. Thank you for your attention.
Thank you. Thank you very much for a wonderful, really wonderful talk.
Do we have questions from the audience or also from our friends in Zoom?
I will stop.
So I see we have two messages, but okay.
Tufi, ahead.
Yes, yes, please.
Yes.
Can you hear me?
I have a question on Borges. It was really rather nice that you quoted Borges because Prieto did so in 1970, something when he produced Berdé dans ses pratiques.
So I think that great minds come together on this object.
I have a question on remark rather on translation of lang, langage, and parole.
I found exactly the same sort of problem when examining the reviews of the CLG, the course of in general linguistics, in English.
And some people call speech, parole, but some people call speech, langage, which means that it makes things very difficult.
Have you come across the same sort of thing in this sort of field?
Have you heard me?
I'm sorry, I have a problem with my ears, but I did not understand what you said.
There is a problem between translating from French to English.
Yes, yes, yes, you are right. This is precisely, I do understand what you speak about.
But it is true that the problem is that lang and langage are two extremely different notions, which thanks to Saussure, we began to understand them.
And it is true that in English language and in German Sprache, and in Russian music, give the possibility of a great confusion.
But there are always possibilities to invent a new terminology. So it should not be a problem.
Nonetheless, in Russian, the word язык, and at times речь, and at times слово, is neither long nor language, but a strange mixture of both long and langage.
And it is a third notion, which is neither long nor longage. Yes, you are right. This is a problem.
Okay, thank you.
You're welcome.
Thank you. And we have questions from the audience here.
Please.
Okay, thank you very much for your talk.
So I appreciated your explanation of the difference between the synchrony and the static state.
And I was just wondering, because the example that you showed us with the crosscut is actually a picture of a plant cut across, but then you said that we cannot do like synchrony research about living beings.
And if we understand language as a living organism, we cannot do the real synchrony.
I'm not sure if I understood correctly, but my question was, if really this is so because actually, even sister, he used example of a plant which is a living organism.
Well, you have the right, of course, to consider that language is a living organism.
I think that a language is not a living organism. And then what can we do?
The talk is finished. You see, no, it's not the problem that language is or not an organism. It is the problem that what is the object of knowledge that we build.
Of course, languages do not need linguists to exist. They just exist by themselves. There's no problem. We are totally useless for languages.
But if we want to learn something to see to understand something about how languages work. So I think that the analogy between languages and organism is bad analogy.
It does not, it's not useful to build a theory of linguistics.
Nonetheless, if you want languages to be a living organism, please do. And now we'll have to compare what are your results and what are minds.
That's all. Please do.
No, I don't necessarily want to.
This is like a foreign language as a living organism. But I was just wondering, if we admit that language could be understood as living organism, we can still do some chronic research.
Like, yeah, I don't see a necessarily contradiction there. That was only my point. But I understand what you're saying.
You see, if we decide to study languages as organism, then we cannot make a difference between synchrony and a short dichrony.
It loses this possibility. So we have to abandon so sure. And we will be quite nearer, let's say Humboldt or Fossler or people like that. Why not.
They have a certain charm I like romanticism. Why not. But it's not the same.
And from an epistemological point of view, I think that the idea that the point of view creates the object is more is more useful that you can understand more than if you of course you have the right but if that then if you
have the language is an organism.
And I must say that this is an old 19th century idea.
Sorry.
This is the name.
But do we have more questions from the audience, or from people in zoom. I see some people there in some who could say a big deal about the relationships between
linguistics and biology and organic system, but not.
Maybe I have a small question.
Could you elaborate a little bit on this distinction between history and dichrony, because also in the course in so sure there is some talk about history as something that depends on human actions.
Because I think this, this idea of history was also used by, by Prieto, for instance, and by other linguists. But yeah, how do you see this difference between history and dichrony.
And how would it relate to to arbitrariness to arbitrariness if it relates.
So many people have spoken about arbitrariness that I shouldn't dare begin this discussion.
But arbitrariness has been understood as a sort of fantasy, as a sort of subjectiveness, but arbitrariness is just the idea that there is no motivated relationship between the signifier and the signifier.
That's all. Unfortunately, our hero, so sure, makes a mistake when he explains that ox and buff are different signified, they are not signified, they are objects of reality, and this has been the source of many, many misunderstandings.
Now, history and dichrony. Dichrony is a point of view, whereas history exists without us. Dichrony is belongs inside a specific science.
Dichrony does not exist. Asynchrony does not exist either. They are points of view. But history does exist. This is absolutely, this is real life.
In the, the object of discussion is between epistemology and ontology. So, let's forget history. History was the main objective of the neo grammarians.
They were inside the history. And the whole 19th century was fascinated by history. And it was all from Heber, Fischer, Schlagen, Schleicher, all even Antoine Meier, all were fascinated by history.
And they thought that real science must, cannot, not be historical. Now, what was revolutionary in Saussure was not at all that he dealt with static situation, not at all.
Synchrony is not static. Synchrony is a point of view when you select, especially what you want to speak about, and nothing else.
We have a raised hand from Professor Joseph. Please.
Hello, Patrick. Thank you very much. It was, it was a great paper and I was particularly happy. I suppose relieved. I don't know. I was, I was anyway intrigued to hear you refer to.
You said my dear Roman Jacobson, and I've never been sure, especially since reading your book structure in the whole, which I made. I was very lucky to be able to refer to in my talk to, to this group at the start of the semester.
But you are ambivalent about your dear Roman Jacobson, aren't you? I mean, I'm ambivalent about my dear wife and children. So it would be a normal thing to expect, but I just like to hear you say a little bit about your view of Roman Jacobson.
Yes, I didn't hear.
He said he was impressed about you even referred to Roman Jacobson as your dear Roman, Roman Jacobson. So he would like you to expand on why is it dear for you, Roman Jacobson.
It's like, you know, Roman Jacobson, because Roman Jacobson was perhaps the only linguist with a sense of humor. Once a journalist asked him, Mr. Jacobson, how many wives did you have?
And he said, do you mean in dichrony or in synchrony? So that's why I like Roman Jacobson. Now, he had a whole fantasy. And, of course, I know that he was a slavophile, that he did not understand, so sure, that he was
he invented a Russian culture which did not exist. But nonetheless, we are all thankful to Jacobson for his fantasy, for bringing fantasy into linguistics.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. And
Professor Kallavi, hello.
Hello.
Do you have something to add? Because we were wondering.
So that's so nice and so good to see all you have there. Again, arbitrariness, you said, you don't want to tell about that, but you may know that Israel has formulated the definition of semiotics as
studying everything, what is arbitrary, more or less like this, yeah? Israel, you can confirm.
All aspects of arbitrariness, that is the object for semiotics. But here, the same thing, how arbitrariness and motivativeness are related. I still think that when Saussure first says that principle number one is that language is arbitrary.
And further on, he just somehow becomes not so clear anymore when he is starting to speak about motivativeness. Motivatedness should be understood as just some kind of restrictions or constraints to arbitrariness.
But not really opposite to it. I think that is very, very important difference now, whether arbitrariness and motivativeness are opposites or this motivativeness is simply restriction for arbitrariness.
So, yeah, if you comment on that would be nice. Otherwise, we just will have this discussion later.
So he was talking about the distinction between motivativeness and arbitrariness and saying motivativeness as a sort of restriction of arbitrariness and whether you could comment on that.
Calibri, I don't agree with you. I think that arbitrariness and motivation are extremely different.
Motivation, it means that you have an intrinsic link between a signifier and signified, and motivation does exist in some parts. For instance, I don't know to paint painting, it's obvious that those three words have a relationship of motivation.
Because painting has absolutely no motivation with the act of painting. So arbitrariness means the total absence of possible link. So, no, I don't think that motivation is a part of arbitrariness, not at all.
Yes, nice to see you.
Thank you so much. Thank you. Thanks to all of you.
And now I think, yes, we can.
So now we will stop recording.